# Bark-feeding

This is where we keep the associated data for our analyses of bark feeding and the fall-back food hypothesis in Eastern chimpanzees of the Budongo Forest, Uganda. 

The ingestion of bark has been observed across the animal kingdom and is well documented in wild chimpanzees. The most popular hypothesized adaptive function for this behavior is the fallback food hypothesis, which asserts that chimpanzees consume bark and cambium when preferred food are scarce. However, alternative explanations exist, including the essential nutrient and mineral hypothesis, the self-medication hypothesis, and the stressed-tree hypothesis. Here, we tested whether the fallback food hypothesis can explain bark ingestion amongst two communities of Eastern chimpanzees in the Budongo Forest, Uganda. To do this, we used the site’s long-term behavioral data, 8-months of direct and indirect observations, and forest transect data collected in both community home ranges. We employed several analyses including Pearson correlation tests, qualitative comparisons of descriptive data and heat maps, and interpretation of behavioral anecdotes. We found varying patterns of bark-feeding seasonality across tree species, with bark-feeding on several species showing no correlation with food scarcity. We also identified differences in the amount of bark targeted between tree species, and report anecdotal evidence of chimpanzees prioritizing bark over high-value foods. Lastly, we found that bark-feeding on select species disproportionally occurs far from community core areas, despite relative abundance of these species within the home range. As a result, we argue that the fallback food hypothesis cannot explain bark ingestion across all tree species, and instead present supporting evidence for several alternative hypotheses, challenging the widely accepted function of bark-feeding.
